RAFAEL IRIZARRY: In a way, the sampling models we've been talking about
are also used by banks to decide interest rates.
Let's see how this could be.
Suppose you run a small bank that has a history of identifying
potential homeowners that can be trusted to make payments.
In fact, historically in a given year only 2%
of your customers default, meaning that they don't pay back the money
you lent them.
However, note that if you simply loan money to everybody without interest,
you'll end up losing money due to this 2%.
Although you know 2% of your clients will probably default,
you don't know which ones.
However, by charging everybody just a bit extra
you can make up for the losses incurred due to the 2%,
and also pay the employees at work to make these loans happen.
You can also make a profit, but if you set the interest rate too high
your clients will go to another bank.
We use all these facts and some probability theory
to decide what interest rates we should charge.
Suppose your bank will give out 1,000 loans for 180,000 this year.
Also suppose that your bank loses, after adding up
all the costs, $200,000 per foreclosure.
For simplicity, we assume that that includes all operational costs.
A sampling model for this scenario is coded like this.
We either default and lose money, or not default and not lose money.
If we run the simulation we see that we lose $2.8 millions.
Note that the total loss defined by the final sum is a random variable.
Every time you run the code you get a different answer.
This is because it's a probability of defaulting.
It's not going to happen for sure.
We can easily construct a Monte Carlo simulation
to get an idea of the distribution of this random variable.
Here's the distribution.
You can see that we're going to lose money because of these people
that default. And here's the distribution of how much money we're
going to lose in millions.
We don't really need a Monte Carlo simulation though.
Using what we've learned, the CLT tells us
that because our losses are a sum of independent draws,
its distribution is approximately normal with expected
value and standard deviation given by the following formula.
We can now set an interest rate to guarantee that on average, we
break even.
Basically, we need to add a quantity x to each loan, which in this case
are represented by draws, so that the expected value is zero.
That means breaking even.
If we define l to be the loss per foreclosure,
we need to set x so that the following formula holds,
which implies that x can be calculated using this R code, which gives us
about 4,081.
This is an interest rate of about 2%.
We still have a problem though.
Although this interest rate guarantees that on average we break even,
there's a 50% chance that we will lose money.
If our bank loses money, we have to close it down.
So we need to pick an interest rate that makes it unlikely for this to happen.
At the same time, if the interest rate is too high
our clients will go to another bank.
So we must be willing to take some risks.
So, let's they say that we want our chances
of losing money to be one in 100.
What does x have to be now?
This one is a bit harder.
We want the sum-- let's call it capital S-- to have the probability
of S less than zero to be 0.01.
We know that S is approximately normal.
The expected value of S is given by this formula,
with n the number of draws, which in this case
represents the number of loans.
The standard error is given by this formula.
Because x is positive and l is negative, we
know that the absolute value of x minus l is x minus l.
Note that these are just the formulas we showed earlier,
but using more compact symbols.
Now we're going to use a mathematical trick that
is very common in statistics.
We're going to add and subtract the same quantities to both sides of the event S
less than zero so that the probability does not change,
and we end up with a standard normal random variable
on the left, which will then permit us to write down an equation with only
x as an unknown.
Here it goes.
We want the probability of S being less than zero to be 0.01.
So what we're going to do now is we're going
to subtract the expected value of S and divide by the standard error of S
on both sides of the equation.
All we did was add and divide by the same quantity on both sides.
We did this because now the term on the left
is a standard normal random variable, which we will rename as capital Z.
Now, we will fill in the blanks with the actual formula for expected value
and standard error.
The formula now looks like this.
We have a Z on the left.
That's good, that's going to make things easier later.
The right looks complicated, but remember
that l, p, and n are all known amounts, so eventually we'll
turn them into numbers.
Now, because the term on the left side is a normal random variable
with expected value of zero and standard error one,
it means that the quantity on the right must
be equal to qnorm of 0.01, which is negative 2.32.
Then the equation above will hold true.
Remember that if we set little z to be qnorm of 0.01,
this will give you a value of little z for which the following formula is
true.
The probability of big Z, less than or equal to little z, equal 0.01.
So this means that the right side of the complicated equation
must be equal to qnorm 0.01.
So we have this formula.
The trick works, because we end up with an expression containing
x that we know has to be equal to an quantity depending on things we know.
Solving for x is now simply, algebra.
If we do it, we get that the x has to be about 6,249,
which is an interest rate of about 3%, which is still pretty good.
Note also that by choosing this interest rate,
we now have an expected profit per loan of about $2,124,
which is a total expected profit of about $2 million.
We can run a Monte Carlo simulation and check our theoretical approximation.
We do that, and we indeed get that value again.
And again, the probability of profit being less than zero
according to the Monte Carlo simulation is about 1%.